---
title: "Loan Efficiency Calculator"
written: "2017-01-22"
slug: "/loan-efficiency-calculator/"
tags: ["finance"]
description: "This calculator assists in running the numbers on loan overpayment and how that affects your interest paid and time to final payment."
---

import LoanCalculator from "./loan-calculator"

# Loan Efficiency Calculator

## Debt Payoff

When tackling debt, there are plenty of pointers out there for the
best method. The most efficient way to pay down the debt is with the
highest interest first. Finances are highly emotional though. If
they weren't, it would be simply that income has to be greater then
expenses, and nobody would ever struggle.

Yes, they are clearly emotional.

So how do we best approach things then? Well, paying off the loan
with the smallest balance first is the answer. Depending on your
loan situation though, this can be very fiscally inefficient. If you
are anything like me, you hate paying interest and fees.

Perhaps hate is too strong a word.

There has to be a solution to this, right? Well, it seems to best to
have a mix of both of these methods. Only you know you. Start off
with a quick win, and then tackle that high interest debt. Or hit
the high interest head first.


Most importantly though, know what effects these choices create,
emotional highs paying off loans or fiscal wins paying less
interest. Secondly make the plan consistent by paying the same
amount every month. As loans pay off, you will be making greater and
greater additional payments as that payment "snowball" or creates an
"avalanche" effect.


The best part? I created a calculator below to help you run the
numbers. Feel free to shoot me an email or tweet me with any
feedback or questions!

## Calculator Breakdown

Firstly, we enter the total payment. This is the amount you pay
month over month, consistently, even as you pay off loans.


Next, we add all of our loans. The name is just a label to keep you
sane. The balance is how much you owe on the loan; the amount of
money that interest accrues upon. The interest rate is entered as a
percent. It is the APY, not APR. The minimum payment is the smallest
you owe monthly to not go into default.


Continuing, each loan will show the interest paid as well as the
time it took to pay off this loan. There is a max loan of 60 years
to prevent errors, but hopefully that is not a limit you will need
to consider.


As loans are paid off, the additional payment amount increases by
the minimum payment of each loan that is paid off. At the bottom,
you can view the total numbers. The total balance is how much debt
you have right now. The minimum payment represents the (total
minimum payment) + (the additional payment) = (total payment), where
the total payment is the first number that we entered.


Lastly we have the total interest paid. Feel free to play around
with the order of loan payment and see how it affects this number.
Strike a good balance between minimizing this number and getting
enough wins to keep you on the horse.

Good luck, and happy math!

`<LoanCalculator />` should run here, but an upstream bug means it
is broken.
<!-- <LoanCalculator /> -->
