---
order: 5
---

### [Engineers Without Borders](http://www.ewbmsoe.com/?ref=www.jacobbolda.com)
#### MSOE Student Chapter

<iframe
title="Tres Cruces Time Lapse"
src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/rtTc8N6SGns"
width="100%"
height="100%"
frameBorder="0"
allowFullScreen
></iframe>

In March 2010, our team of EWB-MSOE students and professionals completed
a vehicular bridge in the rural village of Tres Cruces, Guatemala.
Similar to our other bridges in Joyabaj, this one provides reliable
year-round access for about 4,000 people in Tres Cruces and the
surrounding countryside to reach the central town of Joyabaj for
education, commerce, and healthcare. It should also open the doorway to
further development of Tres Cruces and the surrounding region.

This project required two implementation trips. The professional
partners on the first trip, conducted in January 2010, excavated and
poured the bridge foundations and abutments. The second trip, composed
of students and professional/faculty mentors, then completed the
superstructure and retaining walls on the sides of the bridge. In
preparation for these implementation trips, the professionals and
students worked over the summer and fall of 2009 to produce a technical
design for the bridge and a plan for constructing it with the close help
of the municipal government of Joyabaj and the community leadership of
Tres Cruces. The members of the local community, having an eagerness to
invest in this improvement to their lives, willingly provided much of
the labor for both implementation trips, along with on-site housing for
EWB personnell.

I was able to travel on the second implementation trip to construct the
superstructure and wing walls as seen in the embeded video that I
created.